# Frequently Asked Questions

If your question is not in this list, please send an e-mail to the [DaSpec Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/daspec)

## Do I have to use a step definition file for each spec file?

No - step definitions are reused for all the spec files. You can have all your step definitions in a single file, or break them
across multiple files. There is no direct mapping between spec and step files. In the online examples, we use one spec file and one step file for each example just to be able to demonstrate the features cleanly. In a real project, you can decide how to structure the files.

## How does DaSpec compare with alternative tools?

DaSpec is inspired heavily by [FIT](http://fit.c2.com/), [FitNesse](http://www.fitnesse.org), [Concordion](http://concordion.org/) and [Cucumber](https://cucumber.io/). In many ways, it's trying to combine the best ideas from those tools, baking in learning from ten years of working with various teams, from world's biggest investment banks to small web startups.

In a way, DaSpec brings the free-form spec syntax of Concordion (anything goes, no strict format) with FitNesse table processing capabilities (excellent matchers on cells and rows with detailed reporting) and the Cucumber way of automation (linking through regular expressions, using unit-testing style assertions for fine-grained control), all in a format that is well supported by a ton of editors, converters and publishing tools.

The biggest advantage of DaSpec over the other tools is that specs are in Markdown. There is a rich ecosystem of tools that support markdown already, including collaborative editors, converters to PDF or DOC formats, web site builders and similar utilities. Instead of building a spec automation tool and then trying to build out a supporting ecosystem around it, DaSpec takes a format that pretty much everything else already supports, and makes it executable. 

On a technical side, DaSpec currently supports only JavaScript -- more mature tools support many other platforms and languages. This applies to all the tools below so we won't repeat it in the list. 

On the document authoring side, DaSpec here is how DaSpec compares to other tools:

* FIT: FIT has far flexible support for tables. However, the two most important use cases for tables are supported by DaSpec: [tables as lists of objects](lists_of_objects.md) similar to FIT RowFixtures and [tables as sets of examples](tables_as_sets_of_examples.md) similar to ColumnFixtures. Unlike FIT, expectations do not have to be in tables, you can write examples as [free-form statements](../examples/basic/extracting_examples_from_sentences/) and [bullet lists](../examples/basic/checking_for_missing_and_additional_list_items/). This makes it easy to explain things like workflows which do not naturally fit into tables. 
* FitNesse: The same formatting comparison applies as for FIT. Markdown syntax is simpler than the FitNesse Wiki syntax, so DaSpec is easier to get started with, and because Markdown is well supported with an ecosystem of additional tools, it is much easier to take data out of DaSpec and publish it in a different form. Because DaSpec works with simple plain text files, moving things around with DaSpec is easier for a version control system to track than FitNesse, which relies on folders. On the other hand, FitNesse has great web-based authoring and execution tool. DaSpec does not come with anything like that, but it will work with any existing Markdown editors, so you can get the same benefits using a third-party tool.
* Concordion: Concordion and DaSpec both support free-form expectations, so they are similar in that regard. Concordion uses special HTML attributes that might be tricky to maintain when using WYSIWYG authoring tools for HTML. DaSpec does not contain any automation-specific hints or special attributes in the source files, so it is easier to work with in the long term. Also, because DaSpec uses plain text, instead of HTML, it fits in slightly better into version control systems. Diffing and merging is easier and in many cases can be done automatically even in case of conflicts. In addition, Concordion requires one automation file for each specification file, limiting reuse. DaSpec does not impose that limitation, so it's easier to reuse the automation API for related specifications.
* Cucumber: Cucumber and DaSpec both work on plain text files. Cucumber requires a strict format of statements, best suited for describing workflows. DaSpec can easily consume examples written in the Given/When/Then format, but it can also work with [normal sentences](../examples/basic/extracting_examples_from_sentences/), [tables](../examples/basic/tables_as_lists_of_objects/), bullet point lists and pretty much anything else you can write in Markdown. For that reason, DaSpec is more flexible than Cucumber for describing things that do not fit well into flows. DaSpec requires less overhead to use [tables to group sets of related examples together](tables_as_sets_of_examples.md) -- so the equivalent of scenario outlines is simpler. Finally, because Markdown is better supported by third party conversion tools, and DaSpec files can contain additional explanations rather than just executable examples, it's much easier to create a web site or a nice PDF using DaSpec. 
