---
layout: post
title:  DaSpec 1.0 is now available 
date:   2015-08-23 12:00:00
categories: news 
---

DaSpec 1.0.0 -- the first stable version ready for production use -- is now available. You can [install it using NPM or Bower](/guides/install.html). The [source code is available on GitHub](https://github.com/daspec/daspec-js).

This version brings complete support for using markdown [tables](/examples/basic/tables_as_lists_of_objects/) and [lists](/examples/basic/checking_for_missing_and_additional_list_items/) in [executable specifications](/guides/executable_specifications.html), as well as more precise reporting for failures in [free-form sentence expectations](/examples/basic/extracting_examples_from_sentences/).

The next major new feature is a [clean, simple expectation syntax](/guides/matchers.html). DaSpec now tries to automatically guess the right parameter position to mark successes and failures, so you can write less code and maintain it easier. The new expectation model also allows you to extend DaSpec with [your own expectation matchers](/examples/advanced/custom_matchers/), so you can work with complex domain objects easier. 

You can publish and install matchers as NPM modules. As an example, we created a nice extension that [converts units and compares quantities](https://github.com/daspec/daspec-js-quantity-matchers). You can use it to check things like `expect(expectedArea).quantityToBeLessThan('10 m^2')`.

Version 1.0.0 also brings better support for continuous integration. With the [JUnit XML Formatter](https://github.com/daspec/daspec-js-junit-xml-formatter) you can load DaSpec execution results into pretty much any modern CI server, and track test execution trends over time.

Finally, this version brings support for testing Node modules. You can now use the `require` mechanism from step definition files to connect to node modules. For an example of that in action, see the [DaSpec NPM Example Project](https://github.com/daspec/daspec-js-npm-example).

We also thoroughly updated the documentation web site, making things easier to find from the homepage, and adding pages to help you get started easier, including:

* [How to write specifications with DaSpec](/guides/how_to_write_specifications.html)
* [Good specifications/test design practices](/guides/good_writing_practices.html)
* [Good automation practices](/guides/good_automation_practices.html)
* [Several new live examples demonstrating key features](/examples/)

Check out the [Future Plans](/guides/future_plans.html) page for some ideas that we'll be working on next. [Get in touch](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/daspec) and let us know what else you would like to do with DaSpec.
